Maps shape how we see reality even when
they leave parts of it out. Take the
Arctic as an example. Deep under the
sea, there is a mountain range called
the Lomonosov Ridge. It runs through the
center of the region, and even though
it's not visible on ordinary maps, it
sits just below the polar ice.
Denmark, Russia, and Canada claim the
disputed area as their own and have
submitted legal cases with the United
Nations under international law. The
United States is excluded from this
process. The geometry of the Lomonosov
Ridge blocks its claims. As a result,
the Americans are seeking to secure a
seat at the table by sidelining Denmark
and inheriting its claims.
Right or wrong, whoever wins will get to
extend its continental shelf over the
North Pole, and in doing so, claim all
the natural riches and change the global
map and consciousness forever. There's a
lot on the line. Maps, after all, have a
habit of becoming policy.
The Arctic, however, isn't just remote,
it's also difficult to operate in.
Satellite coverage is weaker at high
latitudes, signals degrade, and
navigation becomes less reliable. That's
one of the reasons why areas like the
Lomonosov Ridge are so hard to monitor,
let alone control. And that brings us to
today's sponsor, Spark AI, trading as
SPAI in Canada and SPAIF on US OTC
markets.
Spark AI's proprietary technology allows
drones to operate autonomously, enabling
them to locate, target, and navigate
entirely on their own. It's designed for
situations where traditional connections
either degrade or disappear entirely,
and it works across air, land, and sea.
In other words, they develop systems
that can operate in signal-denied
environments, including the Arctic. But,
what makes this particularly interesting
is where the company is heading. Spark
AI recently brought in Matt McCran, the
former CEO of DroneShield, to lead its
US expansion.
His focus is to take Spark AI's
geolocation technology into the field
and form partnerships with defense
contractors. That push is already
showing results. The company just
announced a strategic partnership to
deploy its platform in Ukraine, which
will be its first real-world deployment.
If you want to learn more about Spark
AI, check out the link down in the
description. Just make sure to do your
own due diligence.
Discovered in 1948 by Soviet
researchers, the Lomonosov Ridge split
the Arctic into two pockets, whereas
previously it had been assumed that the
Arctic body was a single hollow basin.
The ridge was appropriately named after
the 18th century Russian polymath,
Mikhail Lomonosov, who had predicted 200
years before that such passages, cliffs,
and mountains would be found beneath the
Arctic ice. More than 70 years have
passed since the discovery, and yet it
remains one of the most poorly mapped
seafloors in the world.
Scientific evidence is difficult to come
by because of the extreme climate. Even
with multibeam sonar technology, which
is the most powerful tool for deep-sea
exploration, the resolution along the
Lomonosov Ridge is only on the order of
hundreds of meters. Getting more
accurate data requires a lot more
surveys from all possible angles. What
makes the process even more taxing is
that charting a bathymetric map is not
enough. Hard evidence, besides multibeam
sonar mapping, requires scientists to
physically obtain a piece of the ridge.
This is easier said than done. Getting
to the Arctic is hard enough, but one
then needs to extract a lump of rock
that lies beneath hundreds of meters of
water topped by floating sea ice.
Even after the sample is obtained,
scientists need to prove that the piece
is truly of the ridge and not some rock
that drifted from elsewhere, which would
give false readings. Only by following
these steps can scientists trace the
mountains geological origins. The whole
process takes time, expertise, and
substantial funding. It's no wonder then
that the Arctic seafloor is so poorly
charted. This scientific progress
matters because of the law of the sea
protocols. All the coastal nations in
the Arctic have exclusive economic zones
that stretch up to 370 km from their
shores. Everything within this zone
gives the owner exclusive rights to
exploit or license living and non-living
natural resources, as well as to lay
down infrastructure such as subsea
pipelines or submarine communication
cables. However, that same law permits a
state to extend its rights over the
seabed for a distance of 648 km from the
coast. Within this extended continental
shelf, a state retains exclusive rights
over the non-living resources. However,
while the protocols allow a country to
extend its continental shelf through
legal mechanisms, the overseeing
committee, known as the UN Commission on
the limits of the continental shelf, is
scientific in focus. The body refrains
from politics and instead looks strictly
to science. So, claiming a continental
shelf is a scientific process. It isn't
claimed by flags, but by data.
Three coastal nations, Russia, Canada,
and Denmark, by extension of Greenland,
claim to have sovereign rights over the
continental shelf in the Arctic. And
there is a reason to invest, not just
because it would change the world map,
but because of the wealth underneath. An
assessment by the US Geological Survey
estimates that about 22% of the world's
undiscovered crude oil and natural gas
sits in the Arctic Circle. Climate
change is making those assets more
accessible. However, a large segment of
the Arctic, including the North Pole,
currently lies beyond the exclusive
economic zone of the coastal nations.
Thus, a favorable verdict by the UN
Commission would grant one incredible
riches to exploit or license.
The territorial dispute among Denmark,
Canada, and Russia ultimately centers on
the Lomonosov Ridge. At a depth of
around 1,700 m and a length of 1,800 km,
the ridge runs near the North Pole and
bisects the Arctic Ocean. It is up to
the petitioning nations to find
scientific evidence that the ridge is a
submerged extension of their respective
territories.
Russian scientists made their first
claim in 2001, but it was rejected for
lack of evidence. The Russians then made
a second bid in 2015 with new evidence
supporting a territorial claim of 1.2
million square kilometers.
In March 2023, the UN Continental Shelf
Commission declared that the outer limit
of the Lomonosov Ridge was geologically
similar to the continent of the Russian
Federation.
However, the commission also noted that
the verdict did not settle Russia's
sovereignty over it. What Moscow has to
do next is chart the finalized
coordinates and submit them to the UN
Secretary General. Those coordinates
will then become legally binding for the
seafloor. Be that as it may, looking
from the other end, the Lomonosov Ridge
also seems to be an extension of Canada.
The same physical samples that Russia
used to trace and map the bathymetry of
the Arctic were found on Ellesmere
Island, which sits in the Canadian
Arctic Archipelago. In 2013, Canada
filed its extended continental shelf
claim, but withdrew it because the claim
wasn't ambitious enough. Five years
later, in 2019, Canada submitted its
second broader claim, which included the
North Pole. The verdict on this is still
years away. The claim is effectively
frozen in procedural limbo due to the
Western-Russian standoff.
Yet, in the race for the Arctic, Denmark
is perhaps the most audacious. While
Russia and Canada seek to claim
territory up to the North Pole, Denmark
argues that the entire Lomonosov Ridge
is a continuation of Greenland and that
its legal claim extends all the way to
Russia's exclusive economic zone.
That is a bid for nearly 900,000 square
kilometers of Arctic space, or about 20
times the size of Denmark. The Danes
submitted their legal claim in 2014, but
it's still awaiting review. The problem
with the Danish claim is that
Greenland's internal politics have
shifted further toward resource
nationalism and distance from
Copenhagen. And this is also where the
United States comes in. The Lomonosov
Ridge's geometry blocks America's shelf
claims. Alaska alone cannot project
claims toward the North Pole. Trump's
bid to acquire Greenland is thus a
workaround that places Washington within
Arctic legal frameworks it otherwise
cannot access. Even as Trump's idea is
widely dismissed as reckless, his
proposal does make strategic sense. Of
course, there are economic, security,
and trade-related interests in
Greenland, and we covered these in a
separate episode. But, Greenland is not
just a landmass. It is Denmark's gateway
to the Arctic. Every Danish claim,
including the bid to link the Lomonosov
Ridge to Greenland, exists solely
because Greenland is part of Denmark.
Without it, Denmark simply disappears
from the Arctic map. If America could
acquire Greenland one way or another, it
would immediately inherit the
continental shelf claims, plus all its
natural riches. What's more, unlike
Denmark or Canada, America would have
the naval and air power to enforce its
claims. So, the rationale is that if the
map cannot bend to Washington, then
Washington must redraw the map.
To understand what follows, it is
essential to grasp what is at stake.
Sovereignty over the seabed does not
change a country's rights or ability to
control shipping or carry out commercial
fishing. So, while the Arctic Ocean is
opening up and new shipping corridors
are taking shape, an extended
continental shelf will have no impact on
such activities. Resources within the
water and airspace beyond the exclusive
economic zone belong to everyone and are
regulated by international law.
Ownership over an extended continental
shelf is all about what's in, on, and
under the seabed. Deposits of crude oil
and natural gas are the primary
commercial appeals. However, given the
current oil price, extracting Arctic
hydrocarbons is not economically
feasible. It might eventually become
more feasible in the future, but this is
a long-term consideration. As far as we
know, there is nothing in the Arctic
seabed that is commercially worthwhile
as of this report. But even without
commercial incentives, there is
something symbolic at play. The chance
to claim ownership over the North Pole,
long perceived as a source of myth and
folklore.
The North Pole holds tremendous cultural
value. It is a place most people will
never visit, and yet it holds a special
place in the consciousness of many
societies. Maps have long been tools of
statecraft and national cohesion. They
depict connections between communities
and places. Maps assert sovereignty,
portray progress, opportunity, and risk.
And even though most flat maps are
flawed, they remain influential.
For example, in most American maps,
Alaska is placed in a small inset box,
relegating the state to a secondary
geographic status. It is one of the
reasons why Americans do not recognize
their country as an Arctic nation. In
China, meanwhile, the map is
intentionally showcased vertically, so
its territorial claims in the South
China Sea become continuous with the
mainland. Doing so reinforces the idea
that China is both a continental and a
maritime power. So, maps play an
important role in shaping national
policy and shaping public support.
That's why Denmark, Canada, and Russia
have included the North Pole in their
legal submissions. All three petitioners
see themselves as Arctic nations.
America wants a seat at that table by
edging Denmark out. The North Pole is
the one place where all claims and
would-be claims overlap. Denmark's
interest comes from its autonomous
territory, Greenland. Claiming the North
Pole is a way of pacifying
independence-seeking Greenland. Without
Denmark, Greenland could never make a
claim for the North Pole. It lacks the
expertise and funding for scientific
expeditions. So, Danish policymakers are
ultimately trying to illustrate the
benefits of Greenland's union with
Denmark.
For Canada, the Arctic has long been
central to its national identity with
about 40% of its territory sitting in
the Arctic Circle. However, Canadian
scientists never intended to claim the
North Pole. That was a political
decision. When Canada filed its first
claim in 2013, the borders stopped shy
of the pole. The government withdrew the
claim at the last minute and filed a new
claim that actually covered the North
Pole. So, claiming the pole is a matter
of national prestige. It scores
political points for the ruling
government and it plays into the
narrative of Arctic sovereignty.
The Russians have a like-minded outlook.
Russia is seeking to develop the
Northern Sea Route along its Arctic
coastline, which goes from Murmansk to
Vladivostok. Doing so would not only
boost trade, but also connect its
Northern Fleet and Pacific Fleet in one
uninterrupted arc. To support the
logistics of such a corridor, Russia is
revamping its Arctic defense
infrastructure. It currently has more
than 40 military installations along its
Arctic coast, including bases,
airfields, radar sites, and deep water
ports. It also has 45 icebreakers, of
which 37 are diesel-electric, and eight
are nuclear-powered.
Canada has little to compare, and
Denmark has even less. Only the United
States can counter Russia in the Arctic,
and Greenland is central to that
strategy. Trump's rhetoric is the result
of that. That's how it goes sometimes.
When interests overlap, alliances become
negotiable.
I've been your host Shirvan from Caspian
Report. If you enjoy these videos,
consider supporting the channel on
Patreon, and click the bell icon so the
next one doesn't slip past you. Thank
you for your time, and salaam.